RFC 143: split our databases out into individual instances (#143)
alphagov/govuk-rfcs: rfc-142-split-database-instances.md

# One database per RDS instance

## Summary

We currently use a one-instance-many-databases approach to hosting MySQL, Postgres, Mongo and Redis. These mega-databases make it difficult to perform major version upgrades – they need to be coordinated across all applications at the same time, increase the blast-radius of problems in a single database, and make it harder to appropriately size and monitor resources for an application.

> This RFC proposes that we split the single RDS instances for MySQL and Postgres, moving to a single RDS instance per database. It also proposes we apply the same principle to our self-hosted Mongo and Redis installations.
> 
> This principle _could_ be applied to RabbitMQ, S3, etc., but it's out of scope for this RFC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC proposes that when applications depend on a supportive service that is not used by other applications, such as a database, the supportive service is distinct from those used by other applications. It is applied particularly to RDS instances, but the principle can apply to other supporting processes such as Redis, Elasticsearch, S3.
```

A suggestion here to try make this a bit less database specific and more of an all-rounder principle.

## Problem

Having a single instance hosting multiple databases has a number of drawbacks:

1. Major upgrades must be applied to all databases in one go, as it's the instance we're upgrading, not the database. Major upgrades are considered risky because they contain potentially breaking, and backward-incompatible changes. This means major upgrades are scarier, so we're less likely to do them until we're forced. They also require coordination across disparate teams so everyone's confident their apps will survive the upgrade.

2. Problems in one database are likely to impact other unrelated services. For example an app with unexpectedly high load on its database could max-out the instance, causing performance degradation in other databases and their apps.

3. Related to [2], it's significantly harder to size instance resources. Disk is fairly straightforward, but it's harder to understand CPU/RAM/IOPS patterns. We're also likely to over-size resources to reduce the likelihood large-scale problems in [2].

> 4. There is no clear owner of the instances. Each app is owned by a single team, and each database should be accessed by exactly one app. However many apps with different owners reside on the single instance. Sizing and managing databases is an app-level responsibility, so it doesn't fit with the remit of Platform Reliability/Replatforming/Platform Health. Having multiple databases on a single instance 

Reviewer: Looks like you've got a premature period at the end of of this: `s/Platform Health. Having/Platform Health having/`

Author: Thanks, fixed. I had an half-finished sentence dangling there too

This is coming up now because our versions of MySQL and Postgres are approaching End of Life (notice for [MySQL](https://forums.aws.amazon.com/ann.jspa?annID=8790) and [Postgres](https://forums.aws.amazon.com/ann.jspa?annID=8499)), forcing us to plan major upgrades for both over the next few months.

## Proposal

We propose that:

> 1. All new long-lived databases are created in their own individual RDS instances.

Reviewer 2: Could we make this slightly more vague and just refer to `instances` rather than `RDS instances`, to allow individual teams to explore non-RDS options should they wish to?

Author: That's a good question @brucebolt. Do you have something in mind, or is this just a concern that we're being overly prescriptive here?

I'm not tied to "RDS" specifically, but there could be a readability problem as we make it more generic. For example, it's easy enough to grok "Split these three MySQL databases into 3 Aurora instances", but as we broaden out to (potentially) all supporting services we're reduced to the RFC saying "distinct supporting services in separate instances". "Instances" has a really specific meaning to me now I've looked at this RFC for a while, but I wonder if it's intuitive.

I'd be tempted to err on the side of specificity if we consistently use AWS services at the moment, with the caveat that teams should always feel able to explore other options if the "standard" way doesn't meet their needs... but if things aren't that consistent then :+1: to removing this. 

📣 @kevindew this ties to your point about broadening the RFC out

Reviewer 2: I think my concern is just about this being too prescriptive.  In future, teams may look back at this and think we'd specified RDS for a reason that we didn't note, but could've been important.  But I'm happy for RDS to remain specified, as that's what we're currently using.

Reviewer 3: Is the general point here to move away from shared persistent storage, whether it be an RDS instance, DBs on VMs or S3 buckets? So should the wording here be something more like "persistent storage should not be shared across application boundaries, e.g. separate RDS instances, S3 buckets, elasticache instances, etc"?

Author: I think that's a valid point too @kerin. Here I'm referring to long-lived compute as well as storage – the wording is a bit awkward but I was alluding to CI, where we might have long-lived instances which house short-lived databases that are created & destroyed in a test cycle.

2. Existing MySQL and Postgres databases are migrated out of the central instance to individual managed-service instances as part of the upcoming major upgrade cycle.
3. Existing Redis and Mongo databases are migrated out of their central instances in-line with team priorities, and prior to any major upgrade.

> ### Consequences

Reviewer: There's perhaps a few other consequences to consider:

- there will be less consistency in DB versions across the platform, individual teams could be on different versions
- easier to identify which application has performance problems and an expected reduction in cascading issues
- a potential increase in cost, hopefully offset by having to crank up the machine to huge sizes when there's a problem

Author: Added 👍

- Creating more RDS instances means that application-owning teams will need to monitor and consider database upgrades as part of their day-to-day work. We can ease this burden through monitoring & reporting, which may be considered by a future Platform Reliability team.

> - Zero-downtime migrations take extra planning and effort. Services such as AWS DB Migration Service ease some of this complexity.

Reviewer: This one seems a little out of the blue - perhaps it's: There may need to be some service unavailability to apply these principles - however this would happen regardless by AWS ending support (and AWS DB Migration service can help) ?

Author: I've reworded to make the point that we'd have to upgrade anyway. I thought it was worth calling out because the additional complexity of splitting the databases could increase downtime (or at least force people to think about it), but happy to remove if the reworded one doesn't fit with the rest of the RFC

- This change affects our production, integration, staging and CI environments. Our setup for CI requires a slightly different user setup so we can create and destroy databases within the instance (where we create databases per test run).

## Questions

> 1. Should we exclude CI from this proposal, and use a separate RFC to cover changes there?

Reviewer: I don't think we need to say a lot about CI so I don't think it needs a separate RFC. I think there should be a distinct consequence for it thought: "CI will need to support a wider range of database versions than it currently supports to cope with teams using different versions"

On the CI front we've got past experience of having different DB versions (we use tags - so right now CI Agent 1-3 have Mongo 2.4 and CI Agent 4 has Mongo 3.2 - best not to comment on the age of those versions mind) so the two things that might be new are: trying to run newer versions of databases and potentially having a reasonable pool of DB options

Author: I've worked this into consequences 🙇

> 2. Do we need another RFC for to discuss the use of managed services (e.g. RDS) in preference to self-hosted?

Reviewer: I'd suggest sneaking it in here in a couple of places rather than a separate one, as just a minor tangent - since that is largely a decision that was made a long time ago and, if it needs to be restated, may be something replatforming want to define.

I'd probably add an item to the problems: We still host some database features ourselves (such as Mongo 2.6) which allows us to run very out of date versions of software.

And then in proposal add a point 4 of: 

```
4. Any future supporting services for applications should be distinct to the application and, where applicable, run on a managed service
```

Author: I've had a go at this. Let me know if we want more (or less) subtlety :D
